# Drivers of the likelihood of evolutionary rescue in response to novel diseases

**Abstract:** The introduction of novel diseases has caused significant declines in many species, and in some cases, local extirpation. Simultaneously, hosts might adapt to these novel pathogens, allowing population recovery, an example of evolutionary rescue (ER). Whether ER occurs might depend on both host and pathogen characteristics such as the transmission route, the degree of fatality or immunity, and the ``adaptive pathway'' in terms of whether adaptive alleles reduce mortality, reduce likelihood of infection, or enhance recovery. Here, we quantify the contribution of these characteristics to the likelihood of ER and extirpation in response to novel diseases. In a stochastic mathematical model of host-pathogen dynamics with evolution of a novel allele that provides host robustness to disease, we compare how population trajectories, including the probability of and time to ER, vary across adaptive pathways and dimensions of disease ecology. We find that ER is more likely to occur when adaptive alleles reduce mortality or when disease is environmentally transmitted; in contrast, when disease transmission is density-dependent, adaptive alleles that block transmission or enhance recovery promote population recovery through loss of the pathogen. Our results provide a framework to identify the relative likelihood of extirpation and ER across cases, which indicates when management interventions can reduce extirpation or buy time for ER.

**Significance statement:** We develop predictive theory exploring the conditions under which adaptation to a novel disease might enable persistence (evolutionary rescue). In our stochastic model, adaptation can either lead to host-pathogen co-existence and persistence of the adaptive allele or lead to pathogen extirpation and loss of the adaptive allele, depending on the relative cost of adaptation and the type of disease robustness. When adaptive alleles are costly and have low benefit, populations are less likely to lose infection, leading to increase of both extirpation and evolutionary rescue probability. In conservation contexts, managers can leverage the range of simulations here to identify strategies, including pathogen extirpation, assisted gene flow and reduction of additional anthropogenic stressors, to increase the likelihood of population recovery.

**File organization:** The folder *funcs* contains the stochastic implementations of the model equations. The folder *dat* contains the simulations run, i.e., defining parameters and range of scenarios tested. The folder *sens* contains the information to run the GSA (parameter matrix, random forest). The folder *figs* contains the code to plot figures in R and the figures themselves (annotations added seperately in Inkscape). 
